README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/DADM-Aiximius-0f172a?style=for-the-badge&labelColor=0ea5e9&color=1e293b" alt="DADM Aiximius" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>Distributed AI Defense Mesh</strong> — Edge anomaly detection, federated learning, and defense graph correlation.
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-agent-dea584?style=flat-square&logo=rust&logoColor=white" alt="Rust" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-training%20%7C%20federated%20%7C%20graph-3776ab?style=flat-square&logo=python&logoColor=white" alt="Python" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/ONNX-inference-2d7dd2?style=flat-square" alt="ONNX" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Neo4j-graph-008cc1?style=flat-square&logo=neo4j&logoColor=white" alt="Neo4j" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Offline--first-10b981?style=flat-square" alt="Offline-first" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Zero--trust-8b5cf6?style=flat-square" alt="Zero-trust" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <em>Consumer to government · Encrypted · Federated · Air-gap capable</em>
</p>

---

## Table of contents

- [What is DADM?](#what-is-dadm)
- [Repository structure](#repository-structure)
- [Quick start](#quick-start)
- [Components](#components)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Architecture at a glance](#architecture-at-a-glance)

---

## What is DADM?

**DADM (Distributed AI Defense Mesh)** is a production-grade system for defensive AI at the edge: anomaly detection on devices, optional federated learning with encrypted updates, and a **Defense Systems Ontology (DSO)** graph to correlate anomalies across nodes.

| Principle | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| **Edge-first** | Agents run on Android, iOS, Windows, macOS, Linux; inference and local storage stay on device. |
| **Offline-first** | Full operation without connectivity; optional uplink controlled by Aiximius (server policy), not the user. |
| **No raw logs off device** | Only aggregated features and encrypted gradient updates leave the edge; decryption only at Aiximius servers. |
| **Zero-trust mesh** | Peer-to-peer sync with mutual auth; optional fusion server for aggregation and model registry. |
| **Air-gap ready** | Mesh and fusion can run entirely on-prem; model and policy updates via signed packages. |

---

## Repository structure

```
DADM-Aiximius/
├── agent/                 # Edge agent (Rust)
│   ├── src/               # Collectors, features, model, storage, risk, logging
│   ├── benches/           # Performance benchmarks
│   └── README.md
├── training/              # Anomaly model training (Python)
│   ├── train.py           # Train autoencoder / Isolation Forest
│   ├── export_onnx.py     # Export to ONNX
│   ├── quantize.py        # Dynamic quantization
│   ├── drift.py           # Drift detection
│   ├── explain.py         # Feature importance / SHAP
│   └── README.md
├── federated/             # Secure federated learning (Python)
│   ├── client.py          # Encrypted gradient push (no raw logs)
│   ├── server.py          # Decrypt-only aggregation, versioning, rollback
│   ├── crypto_utils.py    # Hybrid encryption, signing
│   ├── compression.py    # Top-K + quantization
│   └── README.md
├── graph/                 # DSO graph engine (Python + Neo4j)
│   ├── schema.py          # Ontology: Device, Event, RiskScore, Cluster, etc.
│   ├── neo4j_store.py     # Graph read/write
│   ├── risk_propagation.py
│   ├── clustering.py     # Coordinated anomaly spike detection
│   ├── api.py             # REST API + dashboard queries
│   ├── examples/         # Cypher dashboard queries
│   └── README.md
├── mesh/                  # Zero-trust communication mesh (design + API spec)
│   ├── openapi.yaml      # Example secure APIs (enrollment, rotation, CRL, gossip, DTN)
│   └── README.md
├── reasoning/             # LLM reasoning layer (graph-only, citations, no autonomous action)
│   ├── schemas/          # explanation_output.json, audit_log_entry.json
│   └── README.md
├── deploy/                # Government hardened deployment (Terraform + Ansible)
│   ├── terraform/        # On-prem cluster provisioning (state in-boundary)
│   ├── ansible/          # OS hardening, Secure Boot, FIPS, audit, offline model update
│   └── README.md
└── docs/                  # Architecture and design
    ├── ARCHITECTURE.md    # System architecture, security, model lifecycle
    ├── EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md
    ├── FEDERATED-LEARNING.md
    ├── DSO-ONTOLOGY.md    # Defense Systems Ontology & graph
    ├── ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md # TLS, attestation, rotation, revocation, gossip, DTN
    ├── LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md  # LLM reasoning: prompts, context, guardrails, audit, explanation
    ├── GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md # Air-gap, signed images, Secure Boot, audit, FIPS, IaC
    └── architecture-diagram.mmd
```

---

## Quick start

### Edge agent (Rust)

```bash
cd agent
cargo build --release
./target/release/dadm-agent
```

Uses `config.json` if present; see [agent/README.md](agent/README.md). Requires an ONNX model (train via `training/`).

### Model training (Python)

```bash
cd training
pip install -r requirements.txt
python -c "
import numpy as np
from schema import CORE_FEATURE_DIM, normalize_core, to_model_input
x = np.random.rand(5000, CORE_FEATURE_DIM).astype(np.float32) * 100
np.save('data.npy', to_model_input(normalize_core(x)))
"
python train.py --data data.npy --out-dir out
python export_onnx.py --checkpoint out/model.pt --output out/model.onnx
```

### Federated learning (Python)

```bash
cd federated
pip install -r requirements.txt
# Terminal 1
python server.py --port 5000
# Terminal 2 (run twice with different client-id)
python client.py --server http://127.0.0.1:5000 --client-id client-1
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:5000/aggregate
```

### DSO graph engine (Python + Neo4j)

```bash
docker run -d -p 7687:7687 -e NEO4J_AUTH=neo4j/password neo4j:5
cd graph
pip install -r requirements.txt
export NEO4J_URI=bolt://localhost:7687 NEO4J_PASSWORD=password
python api.py
# GET /api/v1/dashboard/high_risk_devices, coordinated_spikes, surveillance_summary, event_volume
```

---

## Components

| Component | Role | Tech |
|-----------|------|------|
| **agent** | Edge endpoint: collect process/network/file/privilege events, extract features, run ONNX anomaly model, store encrypted, score risk. | Rust, ONNX Runtime |
| **training** | Train anomaly model (autoencoder / Isolation Forest); export ONNX; quantize; drift detection; explainability. | Python, PyTorch, ONNX |
| **federated** | Secure FL: clients send only encrypted gradient updates; server decrypts and aggregates; model versioning and rollback; air-gap export. | Python, Flask, cryptography |
| **graph** | Defense Systems Ontology: devices, events, risk scores, time windows, clusters. Risk propagation; unsupervised clustering for coordinated spikes; surveillance summary (non-intrusive); REST API. | Python, Neo4j, Flask |
| **mesh** | Zero-trust communication: TLS 1.3 mutual auth, hardware-backed keys, attestation, certificate rotation, CRL/revocation, encrypted gossip for anomaly signatures, delay-tolerant bundles. Design + OpenAPI spec. | Design, OpenAPI 3.0 |
| **reasoning** | LLM reasoning over event graph only: step-by-step explanation, mandatory citations, confidence score; no autonomous action; guardrails and audit schema. | Design, JSON schemas |
| **deploy** | Government hardened deployment: air-gap, signed images, Secure Boot, audit logging, offline model update, FIPS; Terraform + Ansible. | Terraform, Ansible |

---

## Documentation

| Doc | Description |
|-----|-------------|
| [ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) | System architecture, data flows, model lifecycle, security, edge model, federated learning. |
| [EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md](docs/EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md) | Feature schema, model choice, training pipeline, ONNX, quantization, drift, explainability. |
| [FEDERATED-LEARNING.md](docs/FEDERATED-LEARNING.md) | Federated protocol, secure aggregation, compression, versioning, verification, failure recovery. |
| [DSO-ONTOLOGY.md](docs/DSO-ONTOLOGY.md) | Defense Systems Ontology schema, graph data model, risk propagation, clustering, API, dashboard queries. |
| [ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md](docs/ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md) | Zero-trust mesh: network architecture, auth flow, key lifecycle, enrollment, revocation, gossip, DTN; example secure APIs. |
| [LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md](docs/LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md) | LLM reasoning: prompt design, structured context injection, guardrails, audit logging schema, explanation outputs (citations, confidence). |
| [GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md](docs/GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md) | Hardened gov deployment: architecture, secure containers, compliance checklist, supply chain verification, Terraform/Ansible IaC. |

---

## Architecture at a glance

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│   ANDROID   │     │     iOS     │     │  WINDOWS    │  ...
│ Edge Agent  │     │ Edge Agent  │     │ Edge Agent  │
└──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘
       │                   │                   │
       └───────────────────┼───────────────────┘
                           │
              ┌────────────▼────────────┐
              │   MESH SYNC (P2P)       │  optional uplink
              └────────────┬────────────┘
                           │
       ┌───────────────────┼───────────────────┐
       │                   │                   │
       ▼                   ▼                   ▼
┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐
│ Local Store │    │ Aggregator  │    │ Aiximius    │
│ (encrypted) │    │ (in-mesh)   │    │ Fusion      │
└─────────────┘    └──────┬──────┘    └──────┬──────┘
                         │                   │
                         ▼                   ▼
                  ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐
                  │ Model       │    │ DSO Graph   │
                  │ Registry    │    │ (Neo4j)    │
                  └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘
```

- **Edge:** Inference + local store; no raw logs sent.
- **Mesh:** Sync and optional aggregation; zero-trust.
- **Fusion:** Optional; encrypted aggregation, model registry, threat intel.
- **Graph:** Correlate anomalies across nodes; risk propagation; cluster detection; surveillance summary.

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>DADM Aiximius</strong> — Edge · Federated · Graph · Offline-first
</p>

Commit message:

Enhance README with Docker Compose instructions for full stack setup. Update agent configuration to support uplink features, including device ID and environment variable overrides. Refactor main loop to handle daemon mode and uplink reporting. Introduce new API endpoints for batch ingestion and subgraph retrieval in the federated server, along with a wrapper for anomaly scoring in ONNX export.

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/DADM-Aiximius-0f172a?style=for-the-badge&labelColor=0ea5e9&color=1e293b" alt="DADM Aiximius" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>Distributed AI Defense Mesh</strong> — Edge anomaly detection, federated learning, and defense graph correlation.
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-agent-dea584?style=flat-square&logo=rust&logoColor=white" alt="Rust" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-training%20%7C%20federated%20%7C%20graph-3776ab?style=flat-square&logo=python&logoColor=white" alt="Python" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/ONNX-inference-2d7dd2?style=flat-square" alt="ONNX" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Neo4j-graph-008cc1?style=flat-square&logo=neo4j&logoColor=white" alt="Neo4j" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Offline--first-10b981?style=flat-square" alt="Offline-first" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Zero--trust-8b5cf6?style=flat-square" alt="Zero-trust" />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <em>Consumer to government · Encrypted · Federated · Air-gap capable</em>
</p>

---

## Table of contents

- [What is DADM?](#what-is-dadm)
- [Repository structure](#repository-structure)
- [Quick start](#quick-start)
- [Components](#components)
- [Documentation](#documentation)
- [Architecture at a glance](#architecture-at-a-glance)

---

## What is DADM?

**DADM (Distributed AI Defense Mesh)** is a production-grade system for defensive AI at the edge: anomaly detection on devices, optional federated learning with encrypted updates, and a **Defense Systems Ontology (DSO)** graph to correlate anomalies across nodes.

| Principle | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| **Edge-first** | Agents run on Android, iOS, Windows, macOS, Linux; inference and local storage stay on device. |
| **Offline-first** | Full operation without connectivity; optional uplink controlled by Aiximius (server policy), not the user. |
| **No raw logs off device** | Only aggregated features and encrypted gradient updates leave the edge; decryption only at Aiximius servers. |
| **Zero-trust mesh** | Peer-to-peer sync with mutual auth; optional fusion server for aggregation and model registry. |
| **Air-gap ready** | Mesh and fusion can run entirely on-prem; model and policy updates via signed packages. |

---

## Repository structure

```
DADM-Aiximius/
├── agent/                 # Edge agent (Rust)
│   ├── src/               # Collectors, features, model, storage, risk, logging
│   ├── benches/           # Performance benchmarks
│   └── README.md
├── training/              # Anomaly model training (Python)
│   ├── train.py           # Train autoencoder / Isolation Forest
│   ├── export_onnx.py     # Export to ONNX
│   ├── quantize.py        # Dynamic quantization
│   ├── drift.py           # Drift detection
│   ├── explain.py         # Feature importance / SHAP
│   └── README.md
├── federated/             # Secure federated learning (Python)
│   ├── client.py          # Encrypted gradient push (no raw logs)
│   ├── server.py          # Decrypt-only aggregation, versioning, rollback
│   ├── crypto_utils.py    # Hybrid encryption, signing
│   ├── compression.py    # Top-K + quantization
│   └── README.md
├── graph/                 # DSO graph engine (Python + Neo4j)
│   ├── schema.py          # Ontology: Device, Event, RiskScore, Cluster, etc.
│   ├── neo4j_store.py     # Graph read/write
│   ├── risk_propagation.py
│   ├── clustering.py     # Coordinated anomaly spike detection
│   ├── api.py             # REST API + dashboard queries
│   ├── examples/         # Cypher dashboard queries
│   └── README.md
├── mesh/                  # Zero-trust communication mesh (design + API spec)
│   ├── openapi.yaml      # Example secure APIs (enrollment, rotation, CRL, gossip, DTN)
│   └── README.md
├── reasoning/             # LLM reasoning layer (graph-only, citations, no autonomous action)
│   ├── schemas/          # explanation_output.json, audit_log_entry.json
│   └── README.md
├── deploy/                # Government hardened deployment (Terraform + Ansible)
│   ├── terraform/        # On-prem cluster provisioning (state in-boundary)
│   ├── ansible/          # OS hardening, Secure Boot, FIPS, audit, offline model update
│   └── README.md
└── docs/                  # Architecture and design
    ├── ARCHITECTURE.md    # System architecture, security, model lifecycle
    ├── EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md
    ├── FEDERATED-LEARNING.md
    ├── DSO-ONTOLOGY.md    # Defense Systems Ontology & graph
    ├── ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md # TLS, attestation, rotation, revocation, gossip, DTN
    ├── LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md  # LLM reasoning: prompts, context, guardrails, audit, explanation
    ├── GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md # Air-gap, signed images, Secure Boot, audit, FIPS, IaC
    └── architecture-diagram.mmd
```

---

## Quick start

### Run the full stack (Docker Compose)

From the repo root:

```bash
docker compose up -d
```

Starts **Neo4j**, **Fusion** (federated server), **Graph API**, **Reasoning** (stub LLM), and **Mesh** (enrollment). See [docs/RUNBOOK.md](docs/RUNBOOK.md) for ports, health checks, and running the agent with uplink to the graph.

### Edge agent (Rust)

```bash
cd agent
cargo build --release
./target/release/dadm-agent
```

Uses `config.json` if present; see [agent/README.md](agent/README.md). Requires an ONNX model (train via `training/`).

### Model training (Python)

```bash
cd training
pip install -r requirements.txt
python -c "
import numpy as np
from schema import CORE_FEATURE_DIM, normalize_core, to_model_input
x = np.random.rand(5000, CORE_FEATURE_DIM).astype(np.float32) * 100
np.save('data.npy', to_model_input(normalize_core(x)))
"
python train.py --data data.npy --out-dir out
python export_onnx.py --checkpoint out/model.pt --output out/model.onnx
```

### Federated learning (Python)

```bash
cd federated
pip install -r requirements.txt
# Terminal 1
python server.py --port 5000
# Terminal 2 (run twice with different client-id)
python client.py --server http://127.0.0.1:5000 --client-id client-1
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:5000/aggregate
```

### DSO graph engine (Python + Neo4j)

```bash
docker run -d -p 7687:7687 -e NEO4J_AUTH=neo4j/password neo4j:5
cd graph
pip install -r requirements.txt
export NEO4J_URI=bolt://localhost:7687 NEO4J_PASSWORD=password
python api.py
# GET /api/v1/dashboard/high_risk_devices, coordinated_spikes, surveillance_summary, event_volume
```

---

## Components

| Component | Role | Tech |
|-----------|------|------|
| **agent** | Edge endpoint: collect process/network/file/privilege events, extract features, run ONNX anomaly model, store encrypted, score risk. | Rust, ONNX Runtime |
| **training** | Train anomaly model (autoencoder / Isolation Forest); export ONNX; quantize; drift detection; explainability. | Python, PyTorch, ONNX |
| **federated** | Secure FL: clients send only encrypted gradient updates; server decrypts and aggregates; model versioning and rollback; air-gap export. | Python, Flask, cryptography |
| **graph** | Defense Systems Ontology: devices, events, risk scores, time windows, clusters. Risk propagation; unsupervised clustering for coordinated spikes; surveillance summary (non-intrusive); REST API. | Python, Neo4j, Flask |
| **mesh** | Zero-trust communication: TLS 1.3 mutual auth, hardware-backed keys, attestation, certificate rotation, CRL/revocation, encrypted gossip for anomaly signatures, delay-tolerant bundles. Design + OpenAPI spec. | Design, OpenAPI 3.0 |
| **reasoning** | LLM reasoning over event graph only: step-by-step explanation, mandatory citations, confidence score; no autonomous action; guardrails and audit schema. | Design, JSON schemas |
| **deploy** | Government hardened deployment: air-gap, signed images, Secure Boot, audit logging, offline model update, FIPS; Terraform + Ansible. | Terraform, Ansible |

---

## Documentation

| Doc | Description |
|-----|-------------|
| [ARCHITECTURE.md](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md) | System architecture, data flows, model lifecycle, security, edge model, federated learning. |
| [EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md](docs/EDGE-MODEL-DESIGN.md) | Feature schema, model choice, training pipeline, ONNX, quantization, drift, explainability. |
| [FEDERATED-LEARNING.md](docs/FEDERATED-LEARNING.md) | Federated protocol, secure aggregation, compression, versioning, verification, failure recovery. |
| [DSO-ONTOLOGY.md](docs/DSO-ONTOLOGY.md) | Defense Systems Ontology schema, graph data model, risk propagation, clustering, API, dashboard queries. |
| [ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md](docs/ZERO-TRUST-MESH.md) | Zero-trust mesh: network architecture, auth flow, key lifecycle, enrollment, revocation, gossip, DTN; example secure APIs. |
| [LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md](docs/LLM-REASONING-LAYER.md) | LLM reasoning: prompt design, structured context injection, guardrails, audit logging schema, explanation outputs (citations, confidence). |
| [GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md](docs/GOVERNMENT-DEPLOYMENT.md) | Hardened gov deployment: architecture, secure containers, compliance checklist, supply chain verification, Terraform/Ansible IaC. |

---

## Architecture at a glance

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│   ANDROID   │     │     iOS     │     │  WINDOWS    │  ...
│ Edge Agent  │     │ Edge Agent  │     │ Edge Agent  │
└──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘     └──────┬──────┘
       │                   │                   │
       └───────────────────┼───────────────────┘
                           │
              ┌────────────▼────────────┐
              │   MESH SYNC (P2P)       │  optional uplink
              └────────────┬────────────┘
                           │
       ┌───────────────────┼───────────────────┐
       │                   │                   │
       ▼                   ▼                   ▼
┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐
│ Local Store │    │ Aggregator  │    │ Aiximius    │
│ (encrypted) │    │ (in-mesh)   │    │ Fusion      │
└─────────────┘    └──────┬──────┘    └──────┬──────┘
                         │                   │
                         ▼                   ▼
                  ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────┐
                  │ Model       │    │ DSO Graph   │
                  │ Registry    │    │ (Neo4j)    │
                  └─────────────┘    └─────────────┘
```

- **Edge:** Inference + local store; no raw logs sent.
- **Mesh:** Sync and optional aggregation; zero-trust.
- **Fusion:** Optional; encrypted aggregation, model registry, threat intel.
- **Graph:** Correlate anomalies across nodes; risk propagation; cluster detection; surveillance summary.

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>DADM Aiximius</strong> — Edge · Federated · Graph · Offline-first
</p>
